Мore free environmental science resources аt: www.ScienceJournalForKids.org
Teacher’s key
How does climate change affect
the Great Lakes?
How can scientists study lake sediments to understand the historical ecology of a lake?
Sediments form as plants and algae in a lake die and drift down to the bottom. The deepest sediments
are the oldest, and the newest ones are on top. By studying changes in sediment composition over time,
scientists can observe changes in the quantity and species of plants and algae that lived in the lake.
Why has the quantity of plants and algae in Lake Superior gone up dramatically in the past hundred years?
Warmer surface water temperatures and longer ice-free periods, due to human-caused climate change,
have coincided with the increase in plant and algae growth. These conditions have made it possible for more
plants and algae to grow and thrive in the lake.
Scientists in this study used sediment cores to check plant and algae growth in a lake. What else do you
think you could learn from studying sediment cores?
Other materials, like ash (from fires) and pollen (from flowering plants), drift into lakes and sink to the
bottom, forming sediments. So sediment cores can also be used to study historic patterns of wildfire and
growth of flowering plants around a lake.
After learning that climate change will cause increased algae and phytoplankton growth in Lake Superior,
you may still have questions about what this means for people who depend on the Great Lakes for food,
water supply, and shipping. What other topics could you research to better understand how algae and
phytoplankton growth would affect people in the region?
Answers will vary. May include research on questions about: How are populations of commercial fish species
in Lake Superior related to algae and phytoplankton levels? What effect, if any, do algae and phytoplankton
have on shipping? Are existing drinking water systems capable of dealing with more algae and phytoplankton
in their source water? What happens when algae growth increases too much (e.g., harmful algal blooms,
or eutrophication)?
