1
august 2017
How can CO2 help agriculture in the
face of climate change?
Authors:
Delphine Deryng, Joshua Elliott, Christian Folberth,
Christoph Müller, Thomas A. M. Pugh, Kenneth J. Boote,
Declan Conway, Alex C. Ruane, Dieter Gerten,
James W. Jones, Nikolay Khabarov, Stefan Olin,
Sibyll Schaphoff, Erwin Schmid, Hong Yang
and Cynthia Rosenzweig
Associate editor:
Gogi Kalka, Becca Edwards
Мore free environmental science resources аt: www.ScienceJournalForKids.org
Humans are increasing the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) in
the air through CO2 emissions. This is changing the climate,
making life harder for many plants in areas that suffer from
heat and drought. However, plants need CO2 to grow, and
more CO2 can make them grow better. So will plants overall
benefit from increased CO2 level or suffer from it?
We wanted to test if the positive effect would offset the
negative ones. To do so, we used scientific models to calculate
future crop production and water use of four important crops
all over the world under different scenarios of CO2 emissions
and climate change.
Our calculations show that although there will be large
reductions in crop yield due to climate change over the next
century, some crops will still be able to grow well. This is also
because crops can grow with less water when CO2 levels are
raised.
Introduction
Abstract
Many human actions, such as burning fossil fuels (like oil,
coal, and natural gas) or cutting down forests, release carbon
dioxide (CO2) into our atmosphere. All the extra CO2 acts like
an insulating blanket, keeping heat on Earth instead of letting
it escape into space. The trapped heat warms up our planet
and changes the global climate and weather patterns. This
can create periods of heat and water stress, damaging to
humans, animals and plants.
However, plants develop by using energy from sunlight to
convert CO2 into plant tissue in a process called photosynthesis.
So we wondered, could the increase in CO2 in the atmosphere
actually improve the growth of crops, and potentially offset the
predicted negative effects of climate change? Some scientists
say it can because more CO2 makes crops grow better and use
less water in the process. But how does this effect occur in the
various regions of our planet that have very different weather
conditions? (Fig. 1)
We set out to answer the following specific questions:
1. What effect do increasing atmospheric CO2
concentrations and climate change have on crop
yield?
2. What effect do they have on crop water use?
3. What effect do they have on crop water
productivity?
4. Are there regions in the world where crops would
actually grow better under future climate change
because of the effects of CO2?
Please see
Figure 1 on Page 2
Some elements of the title illustration are designed by Freepik
Most of our knowledge about how crops grow in high
CO2 environments comes from temperate regions:
areas with four seasons and a moderate amount of rain.
However, crops are grown in other parts of the world,
including in dry and tropical climates. So we made sure
to include them in our study.
august 2017
HOW CO2 CAN HELP AGRICULTURE IN THE FACE OF CLIMATE CHANGE.
2
Methods
Because we cannot be sure how climate is going to change
in the future, we used different computer models to
calculate possible effects of climate change and atmospheric
CO2 concentrations on crop yield and plant water use
(evapotranspiration) for many places all over the globe.
We focused our calculations on four common crops that are
important for worldwide food supply: wheat, rice, soybean,
and maize.
In order to separate the effect of increased CO2 levels from
effects of other climate parameters (such as increased
temperatures or changing rainfall patterns), we made two
separate calculations:
Calculation #1: We calculated crop yield and
evapotranspiration in the future under a changing climate,
but with current CO2 levels.
Calculation #2: We calculated crop yield and
evapotranspiration with changing climate and increased CO2
concentrations.
Finally, we estimated how much crop yield is produced per
unit of water use during the entire growing season, which is
a quantity called Crop Water Productivity (CWP).
The two different calculations allowed us to see if changes
in CWP were caused by the increasing CO2 or just by the
changes in climate. We also compared our calculated data
with results from real-life CO2 enrichment experiments
where scientists grow crops in fields that are surrounded by
increased CO2 levels.
Results
Please see
Figure 2 on Page 3
As we expected, we got very different results for the two
calculations:
1. When we changed climate parameters in our models,
but kept CO2 concentrations to today’s level, we saw the
yields of all our four crops decrease greatly all over the
world. This shows us the effect of a changing climate alone.
2. However, when we also increased the CO2 concentrations
(to the expected future levels) in our models, some crops
grew better and used less water at the same time. This
means their Crop Water Productivity increased. This was
especially true for drier areas, like parts of Africa and the
Middle East (Fig. 2).
We compared our calculated results with results from field
experiments where crops were grown in an enriched CO2
environment. These show that the effects we calculated do
actually happen in nature. We also found that well-fertilized
crops respond better to the increased CO2.
Our findings don’t mean that climate change is great for
crops. However, they can help farmers make smarter
decisions about irrigating and fertilizing their crops in a
world of changing climate.
Figure 1:
Fields of maize (aka corn) in different stages of growth
3
The difference in the two outcomes of our simulations
suggests that the positive effect of extra CO2 on crop yield,
especially when it comes to crop water productivity, offsets
some of the negative effects of climate change on these
crops. This is especially true for dry areas where lower water
availability is already putting a strain on food production.
The more water efficient a crop can grow, the better it can
deal with a shortage of water.
So on the one hand, more CO2 in the air changes the climate
and makes life harder for a lot of plants, stressing them
with higher temperatures. But on the other hand, our results
suggest that there is at least one positive side effect for
production of certain foods: CO2 acts like a fertilizer for some
crops, making them grow better, and most importantly, with
less water. This could offset some of the negative effects of
climate change that farmers will experience in the future.
Discussion
Knowing how and where climate change and increasing
atmospheric concentrations of CO2 affects crops is important
for farmers and planners preparing for a changing climate.
If we know that crops will require less irrigation water, then
we can have more water available, e.g. for irrigating other
crops as well. This gives us hope that farmers will be able
to adapt their practices to grow crops in a changing climate
and continue to provide food.
Conclusion
Figure 2:
World maps showing the difference
in Crop Water Productivity (CWP i.e.
crop yield/evapotranspiration) between the two
main scenarios:
1. Climate change in combination
with increased CO2
2. Climate change without an increase in CO2.
The left map shows results for maize, the right
one for wheat, by the year 2050.
Can you notice how much higher
CWP is when we account for the
combination of warmer climate
and higher CO2 concentrations?
REFERENCES
Delphine Deryng, Joshua Elliott, Christian Folberth, Christoph Müller, Thomas AM Pugh, Kenneth J Boote, Declan
Conway, Alex C Ruane, Dieter Gerten, James W Jones, Nikolay Khabarov, Stefan Olin, Sibyll Schaphoff, Erwin Schmid,
Hong Yang, Cynthia Rosenzweig (2016). Regional disparities in the beneficial effects of rising CO2 concentrations on
crop water productivity. Nature Climate Change
National Geographic: Climate Change. 5 Ways It Will Affect You: Crop Changes.
http://www.nationalgeographic.com/climate-change/how-to-live-with-it/crops.html
This contribution was supported by UKaid grant GB-1-202108 to the Agricultural Model Intercomparison and Improvement
Project (AgMIP). The information presented does not necessarily reflect the views of DFID or the British people.
august 2017
HOW CO2 CAN HELP AGRICULTURE IN THE FACE OF CLIMATE CHANGE.
4
Glossary of Key Terms
Atmospheric CO2 concentrations – The ratio of CO2 to other gases in the atmosphere.
CO2 emissions – The release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, caused by human activity like burning fossil fuels..
Climate parameters – factors that describe the climate, like temperature, amount and duration of rainfall, etc.
Crop – (a cultivated plant that is grown for human consumption (food, fiber).
Crop yield – agricultural output, such as grains; the amount of useful plant parts per unit of cultivated land.
Crop Water Productivity (CWP) – the ratio between crop yield and evapotranspiration.
It’s a measure of how efficiently crops use water to produce grains.
Evapotranspiration – the process by which a plant releases water to the atmosphere.
Hectare (ha) – A unit of area equal to 10,000 square meters.
Photosynthesis – The process in which a plant uses energy from the sun
to convert carbon dioxide from the atmosphere into plant tissue.
Scenario – A possible situation, based on certain assumptions and factors..
Check your understanding
You read above that crops can grow using less water when there is more CO2 in the air. Any
idea how this could be explained?
What crops do you eat? Do you know where they are grown? What is the climate like in that
location? How might the climate there change in the future?
The article discusses how plants are projected to grow differently as a result of changing
conditions like changing precipitation patterns, temperatures, and carbon dioxide concentration.
How have growing seasons for various garden vegetables changed in the last few years?
Other than changes in precipitation patterns, what other factors might change the amount
of water available to a plant? How might some of those factors change as a result of climate
change?
The article talks about how plants grow differently in different regions of the world. Think of
a movie you have seen that was set in a different region than where you live, or a time when
you have traveled to somewhere far away. How were the plants and trees different in that
location? What is it about that local climate that allows different sorts of plants to grow than
the ones you are used to at home?
1
5
2
4
3
Crop Water Productivity
=
 Crop yield (in kg/ha)
 Evapotranspiration (in mm)
Oxygen
Water
Water
Carbon dioxide
Minerals
Light energy
august 2017
HOW CO2 CAN HELP AGRICULTURE IN THE FACE OF CLIMATE CHANGE.
