EARTH
SCIENCE
JOURNAL
for
Where does Australia’s
wildlife hide?
Authors:
Pia Lentini, Christopher Ives, Caragh Threlfall, Karen Ikin, Danielle
Shanahan, Georgia Garrard, Sarah Bekessy, Richard Fuller, Laura
Mumaw, Laura Rayner, Ross Rowe, Leonie Valentine and Dave Kendal
Associate editor:
Tanya Dimitrova
Abstract
People often think that endangered plants and animals are
tucked away in a protected park somewhere in the wilderness.
Yet, we know that many species, threatened with extinction,
live much closer to us – in our own neighborhoods. We began
our research to find out exactly how much threatened wildlife
lives in Australian cities. We overlapped maps of species
habitats with maps of urban areas and discovered that half of
the threatened animals and a quarter of the threatened plants
live in cities! If we care about giving them a chance to survive,
we need to learn to share our space with them.
Introduction
The continent Australia is home to many animals and plants
found nowhere else in the world. We, scientists, call them
endemic species. Many of them are threatened with extinction
because they have lost their natural homes or have to deal
with pollution and foreign hostile species.
Here in Australia, we have been working hard to protect these
threatened animals and plants. Many people think that they
hide away in wild natural parks. But it turns out that many
of them might be much closer than we expect – right under
our noses in the cities where we live. We began this scientific
research to find out exactly how many threatened species live
in our cities.
February 2016 / 01 ESJfK / Where does Australia’s wildlife hide?
More free Environmental Science resources at www.ScienceJournalForKids.org
The Grey-headed flying fox (Pteropus poliocephalus) is a large
fruit-eating bat threatened by conflict with humans, who do not like
the noise and smell bats create when they “camp” and the fact that
they eat their orchard fruits. Flying foxes like cities because of the
trees we plant and the lakes we build. (Image: Kate Hofmeister)
February 2016 / 02 ESJfK / Where does Australia’s wildlife hide?
Threatened species
First, we had to figure out which species are under threat. The
Australian government has designated over 1200 plants and
400 animals as “threatened”. Over the years, many different
scientists and nature explorers have collected data about
these species’ distribution (i.e. where they live) and created
distribution maps.
Cities
The government also has maps with data about where people
live. Using these data, we identified 99 cities in Australia (aka
urban areas). Sometimes it may be hard to tell the difference
between types of urban areas, so we used a very strict
definition for a city:
1. Home to at least 100 people per squared kilometer
(or 10 people per area the size of a football field);
2. Home to at least 10,000 people.
We found that Australian cities cover a relatively small area:
less than a quarter of 1% of the continental territory.
Overlap
So we had a map showing where animals live and another map
showing where the cities are. Our next step was to overlap
them using a special computer program.
We also created a threatened species list for each city.
Control
But how can we be
certain that the overlap
between plants and
animals’ homes and
our human cities is
not just a coincidence?
To help us be sure, we
made the computer
program create a control
group of cities – madeup,
“dummy” cities
at random locations
around the continent.
We then compared
the real cities and the
dummy cities. The
results surprised us!
Growling grass frogs (Litoria raniformis) are from southern Australia and are known to eat
other frogs when they have the opportunity! Even though they’re pretty tough, populations of
“growlers” have declined quickly because of deadly chytrid fungus, and because the ponds they
live in are no longer connected to each other with natural habitat. Growlers survive in swamps
around Melbourne that are warm and slightly salty, where chytrid fungus struggles to grow.
(Image: Geoffrey Heard)
Every year Swift parrots (Lathamus discolor)
migrate from their winter grounds on the mainland
of Australia to the island of Tasmania where they
breed in tree hollows. Swift parrots are threatened
because trees have been cleared, and they are eaten
in their nests by sugar gliders, a small possum not
native to Tasmania. Swift parrots can be seen in
urban parks feeding on Eucalyptus blossoms
during their migration. (Image: Simon Bennett)
The Canberra spider orchid (Arachnorchis actensis) is endemic to the area
around Australia’s capital city. The grassy woodlands they existed in were
cleared to make way for houses, and the 250 plants left exist only on natural
areas and hills nested in the city. The flowers are pollinated by a tiny wasp,
and plant itself is only visible for a few months of the year - the rest of the
time it exists as a tuber underground which needs special fungus to survive.
(Image: Mark Clements)
Methods
February 2016 / 03 ESJfK / Where does Australia’s wildlife hide?
Half of the threatened animals and a quarter of the threatened
plants live in cities! The data also showed the following:
• All Australian cities harbor rare plants and
animals.
• Threatened species tend to live closer to the
coast and in the edges of cities.
• Half of all studied species - 258 - were found in
only one city on the entire continent.
• More endangered species live in urban areas
than in non-urban areas: on average, there are
10 threatened species per square kilometer in
cities compared to only 3 in non-cities.
• Sydney was the most popular home for threatened
species: 124 live there!
Three times fewer endangered plants and animals live in
the areas we used as dummy cities compared to real cities.
Therefore, these trends are not a coincidence: wildlife seems
to like something about urban living! But what?
Discussion
Interestingly, Australian threatened species are not the only
ones who chose to live in urban areas. A recent scientific study
from the U.S. found that 22% of endangered plants grow in
the 40 largest American cities (which represent only 8% of
the country’s territory). Similarly, in the United Kingdom, the
Song thrush (Turdus philomelos) is three times more likely
found in cities than in the areas around them.
Researchers have come up with a few possible explanations:
• The areas where we built our cities had high
biodiversity (i.e. rich wildlife) to begin with.
(Although areas outside of cities might have
high biodiversity too, just not as many
threatened species.)
• Many cities (especially in Australia and the
U.S.) were established fairly recently - within
last 100 years – so wildlife are still hanging on
there.
• Cities feature a lot of different landscapes:
suburban residential areas, dense urban
development (such as roads, stores etc) and parks
plenty of different habitats for every taste!
• For many animals, it might be easier to find food
and water in urban areas than in the “wilderness”.
• More people live in cities. So it is possible that
we find more threatened species because more
eyes are on the lookout for them. They might
just be going undetected in the countryside.
Results
Map of Australia: the areas with highest number of threatened species (darkest shade) are usually around the big cities.
February 2016 / 04
Conclusion
Our study showed that cities are not wildlife dead-zones.
On the contrary – they are biodiversity hotspots and very
important for conservation. If we want to protect endangered
plants and animals from extinction, we should allow space for
them in our cities!
People around the world are already working on urban
conservation. There are many ways to make our cities
wildlife-friendly:
• Allow development (building stores, roads,
houses) only in certain parts of the cities.
• Have green corridors of trees and plants
between parks so that animals can travel
to find food.
• Protect big old trees with hollows, plant more
trees and have green roofs covered with plants
to provide more wildlife habitats.
• For cities on the coast, lead dogs on a leash on
beaches so that they do not disturb migratory
birds.
See some more ways we can design our neighborhoods to be
more plant and animal-friendly.
• Development = building human constructions
like houses, roads, shops. E.g. Development
from growing cities caused much of the rainforest
loss.
• Control group = one of the tested groups in
a scientific experiment, which is NOT exposed
to any experimental treatment but is tested under the
same conditions as all other groups. This helps the
scientists confirm that the experimental treatment
actually makes a difference. Every good scientific study
must have a control group if it wants to reach valid
results. E.g. The scientists programmed the computer to
create and test random dummy cities as a control group.
These cities did NOT have as much biodiversity as the
real cities. That is how the scientists confirmed that their
finding was not just a coincidence.
• Biodiversity = short way of saying “biological
diversity”, or the “diversity of living things”.
It is all the plants, animals and other living
organisms in an area and the differences
between them because of the way they
have evolved. E.g. Australia is a continent with high
biodiversity.
• Conservation = people’s effort to protect nature.
E.g. A lot of students participate in wildlife
conservation programs in their communities.
• Hotspot = an area with exceptionally high
biodiversity. E.g. Scientists discovered that Sydney
is a hotspot for biodiversity – more
than 120 threatened species live there.
• Species distribution = the area where an animal or
a plant species can be found. E.g. Some plants
have a very small distribution – they only
grow in one isolated region.
• Urban = related to cities. E.g. Some
neighborhoods have started urban
farms to grow fruits and veggies for their
communities.
References
Ives, C. D., Lentini, P. E., Threlfall, C. G., Ikin,
K., Shanahan, D. F., Garrard, G. E., Bekessy,
S. A., Fuller, R. A., Mumaw, L., Rayner, L.,
Rowe, R., Valentine, L. E. and Kendal, D.
(2016), Cities are hotspots for threatened
species. Global Ecology and Biogeography,
25: 117–126.
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/geb.12404/full
Schwartz, M.W., Jurjavcic, N.L. & Brien, J.M.O. (2002)
Conservation’s disenfranchised urban poor. Bioscience, 52,
601–606.
http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/content/52/7/601.full
Chicago Wildlife Watch: help scientists identify wildlife
caught on camera: www.chicagowildlifewatch.org/
More free Environmental Science resources at www.ScienceJournalForKids.org
A vision of a more wildlife-friendly city.
(Image: Georgia Garrard, Sarah Bekessy, Simon van Wijnen,
Mauro Baracco, Jonathan Ware, Catherine Horwill)
Glossary of Key Terms
